---
layout: post
title: Allegro.tech reaches for the stars
author: joanna.antkowiak
---

At Allegro, we want to give our employees as many opportunities to exchange knowledge and experience as possible.
To this end, we hold a whole lot of internal conferences and theme meetings, which indeed attract a huge audience.
Recently we have come up with an idea of moving a step further and organising a series of talks with well-known and
appreciated IT people, whom we nicely called IT Stars :)

The guests we want to invite will be experts in their areas of interests selected by our people.

The meetings will be open and held several times a year interchangeably in various cities of our operations,
i.e. Poznań, Toruń, Warsaw, Kraków and Wrocław.

The Stars’ visits will be a great occasion not only to listen to their presentations, but also to grab a beer and talk
with our engineers in a less official atmosphere.

And so, on August 10th join us at the first, pilot forum and meet Martin Thomson, a Java expert from across the ocean. 

Martin has over 2 decades of experience building complex and high-performance computing systems. He is most recently known
for his work on Aeron and SBE. Previously at LMAX he was the co-founder and CTO when he created the Disruptor.
Prior to LMAX Martin worked for Betfair, three different content companies wrestling with the world largest product catalogues,
and was a lead on some of the most significant C++ and Java systems of the 1990s in the automotive and finance domains.

If you are not in Warsaw and do not manage to take part in the meeting, no worries! Search for a link to streaming on the event web page!

For all the information and registration form, go to: http://bit.ly/1JpeeT5

See you on August 10th!

